README.md, before:

# SS-BGP Data Tools

This repository includes a set of tools to process data obtained from the routing [simulator](https://github.com/ssbgp/simulator). These tools were developed to process data from simulation we conducted during our research. They were conceived to meet out own requirements. For this reason, they may not be very useful for most people.

## Tool summary

Here is the list of tools included in this repository.

- basic-data
- inv-cumsum

## Installation

All tools require the python interpreter version 3.6 or later. The next section shows how the python interpreter can be installed in different platforms. If you are sure your system already includes the correct version of python installed, please move to [Install Tools](#install-tools).

### Install Python Interpreter (and pip)

The way python is installed greatly depends on your platform.

###### Windows/MacOS

1. Go to Python's download page https://www.python.org/downloads/
1. Press the *'Download'* for the latest version of python 3. At the time of writing that is version 3.6.4. This will direct you to the download page for that release.
1. Scroll all the way down. There should be a table called *Files* including multiple installers. Download the installer for your OS and architecture. 
1. The last step is to run the installer and follow each step.

**IMPORTANT:** make sure **`pip`** is installed.

###### Linux

Most linux distributions come with python 3 pre-installed. Thus, the first step is to check which version is installed. Enter the following command in a terminal.

    python3 -V

If the installed is earlier than 3.6, then you have to install a later version. The best way to install a new python version may differ from distribution to distribution. Our suggestion is to search for the best way to install python 3.6 (or later) on your distribution and install it that way. 

After making sure python 3.6 (or later) is installed, you have to make sure `pip` is installed. Most linux distribution include `pip` in their main repositories. To install `pip` follow the indications included in this [guide](https://packaging.python.org/guides/installing-using-linux-tools) for your linux distribution.


### Install Tools

1. Make sure both python 3.6 (or later) and `pip` correctly installed.
    
        python -V
        python -m pip -V
    
1. Clone the project from this repository.

        git clone https://github.com/ssbgp/data-tools.git
        
1. Move to project directory.

        cd data-tools
        
1. Install tools.

        python -m pip install .
        python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
        
   **Warning:** for some distributions you mut use `python3` instead of `python` to use python 3.

1. Check if tools were correctly installed.

        basic-data -h
        inv-cumsum -h
        
   Each of these commands will fail if the tools are not installed correctly. Otherwise, they will show a help message for each tool.

## Tool: basic-data

The `basic-data` tool computes various statistical metrics for multiple sets of data. A *dataset* corresponds to a directory containing multiple data files (`.basic.csv`) output from the simulator. A data file is called a *data unit*. Each data unit contains multiple data samples, obtained from multiple simulations with the same inputs, but different seeds for generating the message delays. 

#### Inputs

The tool takes a configuration file specifying the datasets to compute metrics for. The configuration file is a JSON formatted file containing a single object. Each key/value pair on this object specifies one dataset, where the value is the path to the directory containing the data files, and the key is a label to identify that dataset. Here is an example of a configuration file specifying two different datasets.
    
    {
        "BGP - Peer+ 0.25%": "/path/to/bgp/peer+/0.25%",
        "SS-BGP - Siblings": "/path/to/ss-bgp/siblings"
    }

#### Outputs

For each dataset specified in the configuration file, the tool computes all of the following metrics. 

- Number of non-terminated data units (destinations)
    
    *A data unit (destination) is considered to have not terminated if it contains at least one sample that did not terminate.*
    
- Average of the termination times over all samples of each data unit in the dataset, excluding samples that did not terminate.

    *The termination time of one sample corresponds to time at which there were no more routing events to be processed.* 

- Average of the number of messages over all samples of each data unit in the dataset, excluding samples that did not terminate.

- Average of the number of deactivations over all samples of each data unit in the dataset, excluding samples that did not terminate.

The actual output is a CSV file containing a table with a row for each dataset and a column for each output metric. Here is an example of the corresponding table for the two datasets included in the example of a configuration file shown before.

|      Dataset      	| Data Unit Count 	| Non-Terminated Count 	| Termination Time (Avg.) 	| Messages (Avg.) 	| Deactivations (Avg.) 	|
|:-----------------:	|:---------------:	|:--------------------:	|:-----------------------:	|:---------------:	|:--------------------:	|
| BGP - Peer+ 0.25% 	|       200       	|          25          	|         34000.0         	|     400000.0    	|          0.0         	|
| SS-BGP - Siblings 	|       200       	|           0          	|         24000.0         	|     200000.0    	|          1.0         	|

#### Usage

Here we consider an usage example to illustrate how to use the tool. Assume we performed simulations with BGP and SS-BGP under the *siblings* annotated topology. We want to compute our statistical metrics for each protocol independently, which means each protocol requires its own dataset. To accomplish this, 

1. Store the data corresponding to each protocol in its own directory: store data from BGP is stored in `data/BGP/`, and data from SS-BGP is store in `data/SS-BGP/`.
        
1. Create the configuration file, called `conf.json`.

        {
            "BGP - Siblings": "data/BGP",
            "SS-BGP - Siblings": "data/SS-BGP"
        }    
    
1. Run the tool.

        basic-data conf.json
    

This will output a CSV file called `basic-data.csv`.


#### How to specify a different output name and/or directory?
By default, the tool outputs a single file in the working directory called `basic-data.csv`. To have the tool output a file with a different name and/or store it in a different directory use the `--out` option. For instance, to have the tool store the file in directory `/home/user/data` with name `siblings.csv`, type the following.

    basic-data conf.json --out /home/user/data/siblings


#### How to ask for help?
Use option `-h/--help`. 

    basic-data --help 
    
This command prints an help message showing its usage pattern and all options with their corresponding descriptions.


## Tool: inv-cumsum

The `inv-cumsum` tool is used to compute the inverse cumulative sum (ICS) of the termination times for multiple datasets. For each dataset, the inputs of the ICS are the termination times of each data unit. The termination time of a data unit is given by the highest termination time among all of its samples. The output plot includes one trace for the ICS of each dataset.  

#### Inputs

The tool takes a configuration file specifying the datasets and some properties of the corresponding traces. The configuration file is a JSON formatted file, where each entry defines a dataset. For each dataset we must specify the data directory. Optionally, we can also specify some properties for the line used to trace the ICS for each dataset. Here is an example of an entry for one dataset.

    "BGP-Siblings": {
        "data": "/path/to/BGP/siblings",
        "line": {
            "color": "rgb(205, 12, 24)",
            "width": 4,
            "dash": "dot"
        }
    }

The key "BGP-Siblings" is used to identify the dataset and it will be used as the label. The "line" attribute allows us to adjust the look to the line used to trace the ICS of the dataset. These are all optional. Default values will be used for this properties if none are specified. Here is a list of the properties that can be configured.

- Color, expects an RGB triplet
- Width, expects an integer value specifying the width
- Dash, expects one of three values:
    - dot, traces a dotted line
    - dash, traces a dashed line
    - dashdot, traces a line with dots and dashes interleaved
    
    If this attribute is not defined, then it traces a continuous line.

#### Outputs

The tool outputs two files. 

1. An HTML file meant to be opened in a browser. The browser will display an interactive plot with one trace for each input dataset. Each trace corresponds to the ICS of a dataset and all of them are labeled using the key specified for each dataset. In our example, the label would be "BGP-Siblings" for that particular dataset.

1. An CSV file containing the bins and the (relative) cumulative sums for each dataset. This file includes (1) a single column with the bins, which are common to all datasets, and (2) a column for each dataset containing its the relative cumulative sum. The file can be opened in a spreadsheet application, such as MS Excel, to analyse its data in anyway you want.


#### Usage

Here we consider an usage example to illustrate how to use the tool. Assume we performed simulations with BGP and SS-BGP under the *siblings* annotated topology. We want to trace the ICS of the termination times for each protocol separately.

1. Store the data corresponding to each protocol in its own directory: store data from BGP is stored in `data/BGP/`, and data from SS-BGP is store in `data/SS-BGP/`.
        
1. Create the configuration file, called `conf.json`.

        {
            "BGP/Siblings": {
                "data": "/path/to/BGP/siblings",
                "line": {
                    "color": "rgb(255, 51, 51)"
                }
            },
            "SS-BGP/Siblings": {
                "data": "/path/to/SS-BGP/siblings",
                "line": {
                    "color": "rgb(41, 163, 41)"
                    "dash": "dash"
                }
            }
        }
    
1. Run the tool.

        inv-cumsum conf.json    

This will output:
 
1. an HTML file called `inv-cumsum.html`. The corresponding plot will show two traces, (1) a trace using continuous red line, corresponding to the ICS of BGP, and (2) a trace using a dashed green line, corresponding to the ICS of SS-BGP.

1. a CSV file called `inv-cumsum.csv` with column for BGP and another for SS-BGP.


#### How to specify a different output name/path?
By default, the tool outputs two files in the working directory called `inv-cumsum.html` and `inv-cumsum.csv`. To change the name/path of these files use the `--out` option. For instance, to have the tool output the files to a directory `/home/user/data` and assign them the name `siblings` type the following.

    inv-cumsum conf.json --out /home/user/data/siblings

The tool will output files: `/home/user/data/siblings.html` and `/home/user/data/siblings.csv`


#### How to ask for help?
Use option `-h/--help`. 

    inv-cumsum --help 
    
This command prints an help message showing its usage pattern and all options with their corresponding descriptions.

Commit message:

Update user manual: add '--user' to install commands

README.md, after:

# SS-BGP Data Tools

This repository includes a set of tools to process data obtained from the routing [simulator](https://github.com/ssbgp/simulator). These tools were developed to process data from simulation we conducted during our research. They were conceived to meet out own requirements. For this reason, they may not be very useful for most people.

## Tool summary

Here is the list of tools included in this repository.

- basic-data
- inv-cumsum

## Installation

All tools require the python interpreter version 3.6 or later. The next section shows how the python interpreter can be installed in different platforms. If you are sure your system already includes the correct version of python installed, please move to [Install Tools](#install-tools).

### Install Python Interpreter (and pip)

The way python is installed greatly depends on your platform.

###### Windows/MacOS

1. Go to Python's download page https://www.python.org/downloads/
1. Press the *'Download'* for the latest version of python 3. At the time of writing that is version 3.6.4. This will direct you to the download page for that release.
1. Scroll all the way down. There should be a table called *Files* including multiple installers. Download the installer for your OS and architecture. 
1. The last step is to run the installer and follow each step.

**IMPORTANT:** make sure **`pip`** is installed.

###### Linux

Most linux distributions come with python 3 pre-installed. Thus, the first step is to check which version is installed. Enter the following command in a terminal.

    python3 -V

If the installed is earlier than 3.6, then you have to install a later version. The best way to install a new python version may differ from distribution to distribution. Our suggestion is to search for the best way to install python 3.6 (or later) on your distribution and install it that way. 

After making sure python 3.6 (or later) is installed, you have to make sure `pip` is installed. Most linux distribution include `pip` in their main repositories. To install `pip` follow the indications included in this [guide](https://packaging.python.org/guides/installing-using-linux-tools) for your linux distribution.


### Install Tools

1. Make sure both python 3.6 (or later) and `pip` correctly installed.
    
        python -V
        python -m pip -V
    
1. Clone the project from this repository.

        git clone https://github.com/ssbgp/data-tools.git
        
   If you do not have git installed, you can download the project directly from the GitHub page.
        
1. Move to the project directory.

        cd data-tools
        
1. Install all of the tools.

        python -m pip install . --user
        python -m pip install -r requirements.txt --user
        
   **Warning:** some linux distributions use `python3` instead of `python` to reference Python 3.

1. Check if tools were correctly installed.

        basic-data -h
        inv-cumsum -h
        
   Each of these commands will fail if the tools are not installed correctly. Otherwise, they will show a help message for each tool.

## Tool: basic-data

The `basic-data` tool computes various statistical metrics for multiple sets of data. A *dataset* corresponds to a directory containing multiple data files (`.basic.csv`) output from the simulator. A data file is called a *data unit*. Each data unit contains multiple data samples, obtained from multiple simulations with the same inputs, but different seeds for generating the message delays. 

#### Inputs

The tool takes a configuration file specifying the datasets to compute metrics for. The configuration file is a JSON formatted file containing a single object. Each key/value pair on this object specifies one dataset, where the value is the path to the directory containing the data files, and the key is a label to identify that dataset. Here is an example of a configuration file specifying two different datasets.
    
    {
        "BGP - Peer+ 0.25%": "/path/to/bgp/peer+/0.25%",
        "SS-BGP - Siblings": "/path/to/ss-bgp/siblings"
    }

#### Outputs

For each dataset specified in the configuration file, the tool computes all of the following metrics. 

- Number of non-terminated data units (destinations)
    
    *A data unit (destination) is considered to have not terminated if it contains at least one sample that did not terminate.*
    
- Average of the termination times over all samples of each data unit in the dataset, excluding samples that did not terminate.

    *The termination time of one sample corresponds to time at which there were no more routing events to be processed.* 

- Average of the number of messages over all samples of each data unit in the dataset, excluding samples that did not terminate.

- Average of the number of deactivations over all samples of each data unit in the dataset, excluding samples that did not terminate.

The actual output is a CSV file containing a table with a row for each dataset and a column for each output metric. Here is an example of the corresponding table for the two datasets included in the example of a configuration file shown before.

|      Dataset      	| Data Unit Count 	| Non-Terminated Count 	| Termination Time (Avg.) 	| Messages (Avg.) 	| Deactivations (Avg.) 	|
|:-----------------:	|:---------------:	|:--------------------:	|:-----------------------:	|:---------------:	|:--------------------:	|
| BGP - Peer+ 0.25% 	|       200       	|          25          	|         34000.0         	|     400000.0    	|          0.0         	|
| SS-BGP - Siblings 	|       200       	|           0          	|         24000.0         	|     200000.0    	|          1.0         	|

#### Usage

Here we consider an usage example to illustrate how to use the tool. Assume we performed simulations with BGP and SS-BGP under the *siblings* annotated topology. We want to compute our statistical metrics for each protocol independently, which means each protocol requires its own dataset. To accomplish this, 

1. Store the data corresponding to each protocol in its own directory: store data from BGP is stored in `data/BGP/`, and data from SS-BGP is store in `data/SS-BGP/`.
        
1. Create the configuration file, called `conf.json`.

        {
            "BGP - Siblings": "data/BGP",
            "SS-BGP - Siblings": "data/SS-BGP"
        }    
    
1. Run the tool.

        basic-data conf.json
    

This will output a CSV file called `basic-data.csv`.


#### How to specify a different output name and/or directory?
By default, the tool outputs a single file in the working directory called `basic-data.csv`. To have the tool output a file with a different name and/or store it in a different directory use the `--out` option. For instance, to have the tool store the file in directory `/home/user/data` with name `siblings.csv`, type the following.

    basic-data conf.json --out /home/user/data/siblings


#### How to ask for help?
Use option `-h/--help`. 

    basic-data --help 
    
This command prints an help message showing its usage pattern and all options with their corresponding descriptions.


## Tool: inv-cumsum

The `inv-cumsum` tool is used to compute the inverse cumulative sum (ICS) of the termination times for multiple datasets. For each dataset, the inputs of the ICS are the termination times of each data unit. The termination time of a data unit is given by the highest termination time among all of its samples. The output plot includes one trace for the ICS of each dataset.  

#### Inputs

The tool takes a configuration file specifying the datasets and some properties of the corresponding traces. The configuration file is a JSON formatted file, where each entry defines a dataset. For each dataset we must specify the data directory. Optionally, we can also specify some properties for the line used to trace the ICS for each dataset. Here is an example of an entry for one dataset.

    "BGP-Siblings": {
        "data": "/path/to/BGP/siblings",
        "line": {
            "color": "rgb(205, 12, 24)",
            "width": 4,
            "dash": "dot"
        }
    }

The key "BGP-Siblings" is used to identify the dataset and it will be used as the label. The "line" attribute allows us to adjust the look to the line used to trace the ICS of the dataset. These are all optional. Default values will be used for this properties if none are specified. Here is a list of the properties that can be configured.

- Color, expects an RGB triplet
- Width, expects an integer value specifying the width
- Dash, expects one of three values:
    - dot, traces a dotted line
    - dash, traces a dashed line
    - dashdot, traces a line with dots and dashes interleaved
    
    If this attribute is not defined, then it traces a continuous line.

#### Outputs

The tool outputs two files. 

1. An HTML file meant to be opened in a browser. The browser will display an interactive plot with one trace for each input dataset. Each trace corresponds to the ICS of a dataset and all of them are labeled using the key specified for each dataset. In our example, the label would be "BGP-Siblings" for that particular dataset.

1. An CSV file containing the bins and the (relative) cumulative sums for each dataset. This file includes (1) a single column with the bins, which are common to all datasets, and (2) a column for each dataset containing its the relative cumulative sum. The file can be opened in a spreadsheet application, such as MS Excel, to analyse its data in anyway you want.


#### Usage

Here we consider an usage example to illustrate how to use the tool. Assume we performed simulations with BGP and SS-BGP under the *siblings* annotated topology. We want to trace the ICS of the termination times for each protocol separately.

1. Store the data corresponding to each protocol in its own directory: store data from BGP is stored in `data/BGP/`, and data from SS-BGP is store in `data/SS-BGP/`.
        
1. Create the configuration file, called `conf.json`.

        {
            "BGP/Siblings": {
                "data": "/path/to/BGP/siblings",
                "line": {
                    "color": "rgb(255, 51, 51)"
                }
            },
            "SS-BGP/Siblings": {
                "data": "/path/to/SS-BGP/siblings",
                "line": {
                    "color": "rgb(41, 163, 41)"
                    "dash": "dash"
                }
            }
        }
    
1. Run the tool.

        inv-cumsum conf.json    

This will output:
 
1. an HTML file called `inv-cumsum.html`. The corresponding plot will show two traces, (1) a trace using continuous red line, corresponding to the ICS of BGP, and (2) a trace using a dashed green line, corresponding to the ICS of SS-BGP.

1. a CSV file called `inv-cumsum.csv` with column for BGP and another for SS-BGP.


#### How to specify a different output name/path?
By default, the tool outputs two files in the working directory called `inv-cumsum.html` and `inv-cumsum.csv`. To change the name/path of these files use the `--out` option. For instance, to have the tool output the files to a directory `/home/user/data` and assign them the name `siblings` type the following.

    inv-cumsum conf.json --out /home/user/data/siblings

The tool will output files: `/home/user/data/siblings.html` and `/home/user/data/siblings.csv`


#### How to ask for help?
Use option `-h/--help`. 

    inv-cumsum --help 
    
This command prints an help message showing its usage pattern and all options with their corresponding descriptions.
